In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful
Surah Al-Fatiha
﴾In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful (1) All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds (2) The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful (3) Master of the Day of Judgment (4) You alone we worship, and You alone we ask for help (5) Guide us on the Straight Path (6) The path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, not of those who have evoked [Your] anger or of those who are astray (7)﴿
Surah Al-Fatiha: There is a difference of opinion regarding it; the majority hold that it is Meccan, and indeed one of the first revelations of the Qur'an, according to a narration attributed to Ali, Ibn Abbas, Qatadah, and most of the Companions. However, Mujahid claimed it is Medinan, and he was unique in this view to the extent that it was considered a slip on his part. It is said that it was revealed in Mecca when prayer was made obligatory and in Medina when the qibla was changed, to indicate that it is part of the prayer as it was (1).
And the view that it is Meccan is more correct due to His saying: ﴾And We have certainly given you seven of the oft-repeated [verses] and the great Qur'an﴿ [Al-Hijr: 87], and Al-Hijr is Meccan by consensus.
Al-Tirmidhi narrated from Ubayy ibn Ka'b who said that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Allah has not revealed in the Torah or the Gospel anything like Umm al-Qur'an, which is the seven oft-repeated verses, and it is divided between Me and My servant, and My servant will have what he asks." Al-Bukhari narrated from Abu Sa'id al-Mu'alla who said: I was praying in the mosque when the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) called me, but I did not respond. I said: O Messenger of Allah, I was praying. He said: Did Allah not say ﴾Respond to Allah and to the Messenger when he calls you﴿ [Al-Anfal: 24]? - Then he said: "I will teach you a surah that is the greatest surah in the Qur'an before you leave the mosque." Then he took my hand, and when he was about to leave, I said to him: Did you not say you would teach me a surah that is the greatest surah in the Qur'an? He said: ﴾All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿; it is the seven oft-repeated verses and the great Qur'an that I have been given (2).
__________
(1) Ruh al-Ma'ani, Tafsir al-Alusi
(2) Al-Qurtubi said in his Tafsir: - Scholars have differed regarding the preference of some surahs and verses over others, and the preference of some of Allah's names over others. Some said: There is no preference for some over others because all are the words of Allah, and likewise, His names have no preference among them. This view was held by Sheikh Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari, Qadi Abu Bakr al-Tayyib, Abu Hatim Muhammad ibn Hibban al-Busti, and a group of jurists. Its meaning was also narrated from Malik. Yahya ibn Yahya said: The preference of some of the Qur'an over others is a mistake, and Malik disliked repeating a surah or reciting it more than others. Malik said regarding Allah's saying: ﴾We will bring forth better than it or the like of it﴿ [Al-Baqarah: 106]: It is an abrogated verse. Ibn Kanana narrated similar views from Malik. These scholars argued that to say one is better implies a deficiency in the lesser one, and the essence of all is the same, which is the word of Allah, and the word of Allah has no deficiency. They said that the meaning of "the greatest surah" refers to its reward, not that some of the Qur'an is better than others. Among those who said there is preference are Ishaq ibn Rahawayh and other scholars and theologians, which is the choice of Qadi Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi and Ibn al-Hassar due to the hadith of Abu Sa'id al-Mu'alla and the hadith of Ubayy ibn Ka'b, who said that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said to me: "O Abu, which verse do you have in the Book of Allah that is the greatest?" I said: ﴾Allah! There is no deity except Him, the Ever-Living, the Sustainer of existence﴿ [Al-Baqarah: 255]. He then struck my chest and said: "May knowledge be easy for you, O Abu al-Mundhir." It was narrated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.
Ibn al-Hassar said: I am astonished by those who mention the disagreement in light of these texts.
