(180) And peace be upon the messengers (181) And praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds (182)﴿ The end; and likewise at the end of Surah Az-Zumar, after the Day of Resurrection, ﴾And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne, glorifying the praise of their Lord, and it has been judged between them with truth, and it is said, "Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds" (75)﴿ and Al-An'am ﴾But when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We opened to them the gates of everything, until when they rejoiced in what they were given, We seized them suddenly, and behold, they were in despair (44) So the end of the people who wronged was cut off, and praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds (45)﴿ Thus, it is mentioned completely in situations such as: the end of life, the beginning of Al-Fatiha (the beginning of the Book of Allah), and at the end of supplication. ﴾Their call therein is, "Exalted are You, O Allah," and their greeting therein is, "Peace," and the last of their call is, "Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds" (10)﴿ This is on the Day of Resurrection in Paradise. And in Surah Ghafir ﴾He is the Ever-Living; there is no deity except Him, so invoke Him, making religion sincere for Him. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds (65)﴿ Here in this world, so the meaning is as if: praise be to Allah in this world and the Hereafter. That is, ﴾Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿ at the beginning and at the end.(27). Therefore, the supplicant should be keen to conclude his supplication with ﴾Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿.
Interpretation of Seeking Refuge
The Lord of the worlds, Exalted is He, commanded seeking refuge when reading the Noble Qur'an, as He, the Exalted, said: ﴾So when you recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with Allah from the accursed devil (98)﴿, then afterwards the reader begins with Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. So seeking refuge from the devil by saying: "I seek refuge with Allah," indicates the negation of what is not appropriate in words, actions, and beliefs, and saying: "In the name of Allah," indicates what is appropriate in words, actions, and beliefs. You will notice the style of negation before affirmation in many instances, as you say: "There is no deity," before you say: "except Allah." You negate and disavow every deity and every partner in the universe that could rise to the rank of divinity. Then after this negation, you follow it with affirmation by submitting, believing, and being certain that the only deity worthy of worship, the one who governs this entire universe, is Allah alone, without any partner. You also find this negation in Allah's statement: ﴾So whoever disbelieves in Taghut﴿, then follows it with affirmation in His statement: ﴾and believes in Allah﴿, as a sign of the necessity to abandon all methods of disbelief, polytheism, and atheism, and to disavow them before submitting, yielding, accepting, and believing in the methods of truth. For it is the right of this truth, upon which the heavens and the earth were established, that it should not be mixed with falsehood, nor should it be tainted with impurity or filth that corrupts it.
The majority of scholars hold that seeking refuge is recommended before reading the Qur'an, as stated by Ibn Kathir. This is the first formula for seeking refuge, to say: "I seek refuge with Allah from the accursed devil." Muslim narrated in his Sahih: From Adi ibn Thabit from Sulaiman ibn Surad, he said: Two men were insulting each other in the presence of the Prophet. So he made
__________
(27) Dr. Hussam Al-Nuaimi with significant modifications.
