One of them has red eyes and his veins swell. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "I know a word that if he says it, what he is feeling will go away: I seek refuge with Allah from the accursed devil." The man said: "Do you see any madness in me?".
Imam Ahmad narrated in his Sahih: from Abu Sa'id al-Khudri who said: "When the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) would stand up at night to begin his prayer and say the takbir, he would say: 'Glory be to You, O Allah, and praise be to You, blessed is Your name, and exalted is Your majesty, and there is no deity but You.' Then he would say: 'There is no deity but Allah' three times, then he would say: 'I seek refuge with Allah, the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing, from the accursed devil from his madness(28) and his pride(29),' then he would say: 'Allah is the Greatest' three times, then he would say: 'I seek refuge with Allah, the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing, from the accursed devil, from his madness, his pride, and his breath(30).'"
Allah, Exalted is He, said: ﴾And if an evil whisper from the devil should provoke you, seek refuge with Allah. Indeed, He is Hearing and Knowing (200)﴿.
From Haywah ibn Shurayh: "I met 'Uqbah ibn Muslim and said to him: 'I have been informed that you narrated from Abdullah ibn Amr ibn al-As from the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) that when he entered the mosque, he would say: I seek refuge with Allah, the Almighty, and with His Noble Face, and His Eternal Sovereignty from the accursed devil.' He said: 'Is that all?'(31) I said: 'Yes.' He said: 'When he says that, the devil says: He has been protected from me for the rest of the day.'”(32).
Al-Raghib al-Isfahani said: "Seeking refuge (al-'awdh) is turning to another for protection and relying on him. It is said: So-and-so sought refuge with so-and-so, and from it is His saying: ﴾I seek refuge with Allah that I should be among the ignorant﴿ [al-Baqarah/67], ﴾And indeed, I have sought refuge with my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me﴿ [al-Dukhan/20], ﴾Say: I seek refuge with the Lord﴿ [al-Falaq/1], ﴾Indeed, I seek refuge with the Most Merciful﴿ [Maryam/18]. And I sought refuge with him by Allah, I protect him. He said: ﴾Indeed, I protect her by You﴿ [Aali Imran/36], and His saying: ﴾Far from Allah﴿ [Yusuf/79], meaning: we seek refuge in Him and seek His help not to do that, for that is an evil we avoid engaging in. And the 'awdhah is what one seeks refuge with from something, and hence it is said that amulets and incantations are called 'awdhah. And he protected him: if he shielded him.
And stoning (al-rajm) is throwing with stones. It is said: He was stoned, so he is stoned. Allah, Exalted is He, said: ﴾If you do not desist, O Noah, you will surely be among the stoned﴿ [al-Shu'ara/116], meaning: the killed in the worst manner. And He said: ﴾And were it not for your people, we would have stoned you﴿ [Hud/91],(33) and 'rajim' is a passive participle meaning stoned, like 'sa'ir' meaning burning.
__________
(28) His madness: death, meaning insanity (mentioned by al-Azhari in Tahdhib al-Lughah) and al-Nawawi in Nihayat al-Arab in the arts of literature.
(29) His pride: arrogance (mentioned by al-Azhari in Tahdhib al-Lughah) said al-Raghib: blowing wind into something.
(30) His breath: poetry (mentioned by al-Azhari in Tahdhib al-Lughah) which is condemned for evil purposes, or magic. Al-Raghib said: blowing is spitting a small amount of saliva, which is less than spitting, and the blowing of the healer and the magician is that he blows into his knots. Allah, Exalted is He, said: "And from the evil of the blowers in knots" [al-Falaq/4] and from it, the snake blows venom.
(31) Meaning, is this all that he said, peace be upon him? When the questioner said: Yes, he completed the narration in full.
(32) Narrated by Abu Dawood in his Sunan.
(33) Al-Raghib al-Isfahani, Mufradat Alfaz al-Qur'an.
