The seeking refuge (al-isti'adhah) comes with the meaning: I seek protection in Allah, and I take refuge in Him, and I seek His help, and I refrain from the disliked through Him, and I cling to Him, and I take shelter with Him. Ibn Kathir said: "The seeking refuge is for repelling evil, and the taking shelter(34) is for seeking good."(35)
The term "shaytan" (شيطان) is derived, according to the majority of language scholars, from "shatana" (شطن) meaning "to be distant." It is said that a well is "shatun" (شطون), meaning its depth and extent are far.
It is said that it is derived from "shat" (شاط) which means to rage and become intensely angry, to perish, to burn, and to be nullified; the first is more likely(36).
Ibn Kathir said in his discussion about seeking refuge: "It is seeking assistance from Allah and acknowledging His power, and for the servant, it is an admission of weakness and inability to resist this evident inner enemy, whom none can prevent or repel except Allah, who created him(37), and he does not accept flattery nor can he be appeased with kindness(38)." There is no doubt that his danger is immense, for he may plot against a person and gradually lead him astray if he finds a way to do so, until he causes him to fall into disbelief, and he has no power over the sincere servants of Allah. Allah, Exalted is He, said: ﴾He said, "My Lord, because You have led me astray, I will surely make [disobedience] attractive to them in the earth, and I will surely lead them all astray, (39) except Your chosen servants among them." (40) He said, "This is a path [of return] to Me that is straight. (41) Indeed, My servants, no authority will you have over them, except for those who follow you of the deviators." (42)﴿ ﴾And when you recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with Allah from the accursed devil. (98) Indeed, he has no authority over those who have believed and rely upon their Lord. (99) His authority is only over those who take him as an ally and those who, through him, commit shirk. (100)﴿
The word "Satan" comes from "shatn," which means an extended rope, indicating that this Satan extends towards you, so be cautious of him. However, so that a person does not exaggerate in fearing him, the term "the accursed" is used. This description is the most appropriate for Satan in this context, meaning not just "the accursed" but rather "the stoned," so that you can imagine his image as he is being stoned, as if he is preoccupied with himself. Thus, the word "Satan"
__________
(34) The poet al-Mutanabbi said: "O You whom I seek refuge in for what I hope for, and whom I take refuge with from whom I fear."
Ibn Manzur said in Lisan: "Al-maladh is like al-ma'adh."
(35) The Essence of the Interpretation of Seeking Refuge, the Basmala, and the Opening of the Book, by Dr. Sulayman al-Lahim, on the interpretation of al-Tabari, al-Muharrar al-Wajiz, al-Tafsir al-Qayyim, al-Nukat wa al-Uyun, and the clarification of the aspects of the seven readings, as well as the vocabulary in the rare words of the Qur'an, Lisan al-Arab, and Zاد al-Masir.
(36) The book of Sibawayh, the refinement of language, the standards of language, and the essence in the interpretation of seeking refuge. Al-Tabari said in his interpretation: Abu Ja'far said: The one who is rebellious (mutamarrid) is called a devil (shaytan) because of his deviation from the morals and actions of his kind and his distance from good. It has been said that it is derived from the saying of one who said: "My house has strayed (shatana) from your house" - meaning: it has distanced itself. From this is the saying of the Nabigha of Banu Dhubyān: "Suhad has distanced herself from you, a far-off (shatūn) place... so she has departed, and my heart is captive to her";
And "al-shatun" means distant. So it is as if the devil - according to this interpretation - is derived from "shatan". And what indicates that this is the case is the saying of Umayyah ibn Abi al-Salt:
Any shore that disobeys him, he will bind it... then it will be cast into prison and shackles.
And if it were to be "fa'lan," from "shat (to be distant)," he would have said "any shait," but he said: "any shatan," because it is from "shatan (to be far away), he is shatan."
(37) ﴾And whoever turns away from the remembrance of the Most Merciful, We appoint for him a devil, and he is to him a companion﴿ (36), and the status and power of the devil diminishes and becomes insignificant when a person is connected to his Lord, Exalted is He, and dedicates his religion sincerely to Allah, so the devil cannot find a way against him. ﴾Indeed, the plot of the devil is weak﴿.
(38) While the devils among humans may be appeased with wealth or managed with kindness.
