Interpretation of the Basmala
As for the Basmala, its wording is: ﴾In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful﴿, and the letter "alif" in "bism" is omitted both in pronunciation and writing, as a simplification due to frequent usage, and it is only omitted with the divine name "Allah" and is retained in other instances, such as His saying: ﴾Read in the name of your Lord who created﴿(40).
Beginning in the name of Allah is the etiquette that Allah revealed to His Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) at the very start of the Quran, by consensus, which is His saying: ﴾Read in the name of your Lord...﴿.(41)
When you begin everything in the name of Allah, it is as if you place Allah by your side to assist you. And from the mercy of Allah, Exalted is He, He taught us to begin everything in His name, for Allah is the name that encompasses all attributes of perfection, Exalted is He. Actions typically require multiple attributes; thus, when you start a task, you need Allah's power, assistance, and mercy. If Allah, Exalted is He, had not informed us of the name that encompasses all attributes, we would have to specify the attributes we need, such as saying, "In the name of Allah the Strong," "In the name of Allah the Provider," "In the name of Allah the Responsive," "In the name of Allah the Capable," "In the name of Allah the Beneficial," and so on with other names and attributes we wish to seek help from. However, Allah, Blessed and Exalted, has made us say "In the name of Allah," which encompasses all these attributes. The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Every matter of importance that does not begin with 'In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful' is severed" (42).
The meaning of "severed" is that it is cut off at the tail, indicating an incomplete action with something missing (43).
The manuscripts unanimously begin with ﴾In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful﴿, but the scholars differ regarding it. Malik said: It is not an ayah (verse) from either Al-Fatiha or any other surah except from An-Naml specifically. Al-Shafi'i said: It is an ayah only from Al-Fatiha. Ibn Abbas said: It is an ayah from every surah.
Malik's evidence is what is authentically reported from him (peace and blessings be upon him) that he said: "A surah has been revealed to me that is not found in the Torah, nor in the Gospel, nor in the Furqan like it," then he said: ﴾All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿, and he did not mention the Basmala. Likewise, it is also authentically reported that Allah says: "I have divided prayer between Me and My servant into two halves. The servant says: ﴾All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿," starting with it without the Basmala.
Al-Shafi'i's evidence is what is authentically reported that "the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) used to recite ﴾In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful﴿."
__________
(40) Al-Labab fi Tafsir al-Isti'adhah wa al-Basmala wa Fatiha al-Kitab, Ma'ani al-Quran wa I'rabuhu for Al-Farra, and Mushkil I'rab al-Quran for Maki.
(41) Fi Dhilal al-Quran by Sayyid Qutb.
(42) The well-known narration in this regard is the hadith of Abu Huraira, narrated by Qura from Al-Zuhri from Abu Salama from Abu Huraira (may Allah be pleased with him) in the wording "Whatever matter does not begin with praise of Allah is severed," narrated by Abu Awanah in his Sahih and by the compilers of the Sunan. Ahmad has a version from this chain: "Whatever does not begin with the mention of Allah is severed or cut off," and Al-Khatib in Al-Jami' from the route of Mubashir ibn Ismail from Al-Zuhri in the wording "Whatever does not begin with 'In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful' is severed," and the narrator from Mubashir is unknown.
(43) Muhammad Metwally Al-Sharawi.
