And they differed on whether it is derived or not. A group held that it is derived, while a number of those whose knowledge is trusted maintained that it is not derived, and this latter opinion is the one relied upon. Do not pay attention to the view of those who said it is derived from walah (وله) because if it were derived from it, it would have been said in the form of tafa'ala (تفعّل) from it, as in tawalah (توله), since the letter "waw" in it is the same as the "waw" in tawalah. Their consensus on it being ta'alah (تأله) with a hamzah indicates that it is not from walah (ولَهَ)...
And the meaning of our saying "God" is that He is the one who deserves worship, and He, Exalted is He, is the one deserving of it over anyone else(59).
Ibn Faris said in his dictionary Maqayis al-Lugha: The letters hamza, lam, and ha have one root, which is worship. So, the deity (ilāh) is Allah, Exalted is He, and He is called that because He is worshipped. It is said that a man has worshipped (ta'allaha) when he has devoted himself to worship. Ru'bah said:
Blessed is Allah for the singing women who have praised and sought refuge from their deification(60) *** They have glorified and sought refuge from their deification.
And the deity: the sun, it was named thus because a people used to worship it. The poet(61): *So we hastened to the deity to repent*
As for their statement regarding confusion, "He is God (alihah ya'lah)," it is not relevant to the topic, because the hamzah is a waw. It has been mentioned in its context.(62)
And it came in Lisan al-Arab: Ibn al-Athir said: It is derived from Ilah, and its estimation is fulanīyah, with a dammah. You say, "Ilah bayyin al-ilahiyyah wa al-uluhaniyyah," and its origin is from alih (أَلِهَ)(63) ya'lahu when one is perplexed, meaning when a servant is struck by the greatness of Allah and His majesty and other attributes of lordship and directs his imagination towards them,... And al-Mundhiri narrated from Abu al-Haytham that he asked him about the derivation of the name of Allah, Exalted is He, in the language, and he said: Its rightful form is Ilah, and the definite article alif and lam were added for definition(64). It was then said al-Ilah, and the Arabs omitted the hamzah due to its heaviness, so when they left the hamzah, they transformed its kasrah into the lam which is the lam of definition, and the hamzah was removed altogether, so they said al-Ilah. They then moved the lam of definition, which can only be silent, and then two moving lams met, so they merged the first into the second, and they said Allah, as Allah, Exalted is He, said: ﴾But He is Allah, my Lord﴿, meaning, but I. Then when the Arabs heard "Allahumma" in the speech of creation, they imagined that if the alif and lam were removed from Allah, what remained would be "lah," so they said "lahumma"; and it was narrated: "Lahumma, you mend the broken, you have granted majesty, O Jurgura"(65).
__________
(59) The interpretation of the ninety-nine names of Allah by al-Zajjaj, who is one of the scholars of language.
(60) Praise, from praise, which is commendation. And the two verses are in the tongue (praise, is it).
(61) She is the mother of Atibah ibn al-Harith, or the mother of al-Banin, daughter of Atibah ibn al-Harith, mourning Atibah. It is said that she is the daughter of al-Harith al-Yarbu'i. See Lisan (17: 360)
(62) The Dictionary of the Measures of Language
(63) I lean towards the weakness of this opinion, as previously stated, namely the assertion that its root is: أله يأله.
(64) I tend to believe that "Allah" is a proper noun that is not derived, and the opinion that it should have the definite article added to it is weak, as will be explained shortly, God willing. However, their citation of the poet's saying: "O Allah, You mend the broken," gives some credibility to the view that the definite article should be added.
(65) The tongue of the Arabs
