﴾The Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate﴿
And the Most Merciful (al-Rahman) is a form (68) derived from mercy (rahma), like angry (ghadban) and thirsty (atshan), from anger (ghadab) and thirst (atash); likewise, the Most Compassionate (al-Rahim) is a form of it, like sick (marid) and ill (saqeem), from sickness (marad) and illness (saqam). In the Most Merciful, there is an intensity (69) that is not in the Most Compassionate (70), and for this reason, they say: "The Most Merciful of this world and the Hereafter, and the Most Compassionate of this world" (71), and they say: "The increase in the structure indicates an increase in meaning" (72). It has been said: "The Most Merciful of this world because He encompasses both the believer and the disbeliever, and the Most Compassionate of the Hereafter because He is specific to the believer" (73). In the hadith in Majma al-Zawa'id: from Mu'adh ibn Jabal, that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) missed him on Friday, and when the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) prayed, he came to Mu'adh and said: "O Mu'adh, why did I not see you?" He said: "O Messenger of Allah, a Jew has a dirham of mine, so I came out to you and he detained me from you." The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "O Mu'adh, should I not teach you a supplication that you can invoke with, if you had a debt like the mountain of Sabir, Allah would pay it off for you?" — and Sabir is a mountain in Yemen — "So invoke Allah, O Mu'adh, ﴾Say, O Allah, Master of the Kingdom, You give the kingdom to whom You will and take away the kingdom from whom You will, and You honor whom You will and humiliate whom You will. In Your hand is all good. Indeed, You are over all things competent. You bring the night into the day, and You bring the day into the night﴿.
__________
(68) The term "ta'fil" is derived from morphology, which means to derive a word from a singular form, resulting in different terms with varying meanings. Ibn Jinni mentioned that the science of morphology is the balance of the Arabic language, through which the roots of Arabic speech are known from the additional elements that enter into it, and one cannot reach an understanding of derivation except through it. (Al-Munsif 1 / 2). He later mentioned that morphology is when you take a single word and derive it in various ways. (Same source 1/3). Ibn al-Hajib stated that morphology is a science with principles that define the states of word structures that are not grammatical inflections. (Sharh al-Shafiya 1 / 1). See Al-Miftah in Morphology by Abd al-Qahir al-Jurjani; the root is a word or root in a specific pattern, for example: fa'al, to which specific letters are added in defined patterns, thus deriving new meanings for the words. Here, the root is: rahima in the pattern: fa'ila, and the word Rahman is derived from the root: rahm, and the pattern of Rahman is fa'lan, so the elongated alif and the nun were added to the end of the root verb, corresponding to the root: rahm, and the pattern fa'il corresponding to the word Rahim, the letter ya was added before the lam, and its root is also rahm, thus deriving different words from this root, each conveying specific meanings, and the science that deals with this derivation and morphology is called the science of morphology.
(69) Muhammad Metwally al-Sharawi said in his interpretation: The attributes of Allah, Exalted is He, do not fluctuate between strength and weakness. Beware of understanding that Allah has attributes that are sometimes few and sometimes many. Rather, they are attributes of absolute perfection... But what changes are the relations of these attributes... Read the saying of the Truth, Exalted is He: ﴾Indeed, Allah does not do injustice, even as much as an atom's weight﴿ [An-Nisa: 40]. This noble verse negates injustice from Allah, Exalted is He, and then the noble verse comes with the saying of Allah, Glorified and Exalted: ﴾And your Lord is not one to the oppressors﴿ [Fussilat: 46]. Here we notice the use of the intensive form... "Zhalam" ... meaning severe injustice. And the saying of the Truth, Exalted is He: ﴾He is not unjust﴿... does not negate injustice but negates the intensity of injustice, denying that He would do injustice even as much as an atom's weight... We say that you have not understood the meaning... that Allah does not do injustice to anyone... The first verse negates injustice from the Truth, Blessed and Exalted, even as much as an atom's weight concerning the servant... and the second verse did not say to the servant but rather said to the servants... and the servants are all of Allah's creation... So if each one of them were to suffer even less than an atom's weight of injustice with these vast numbers... then the injustice would be very great, even if it is small in quantity because the number of those who would be affected is immense... Therefore, the first verse negates injustice from Allah, Exalted is He. And the second verse also negates injustice from Allah, Blessed and Exalted... but the intensive form was used due to the large number of those to whom the noble verse applies.
(70) Ahmad (Ibn al-Munir), may Allah have mercy on him, said: One cannot conclude from the brevity or length of the structure regarding the deficiency or completeness of the intensity; do you not see that some forms of intensity, like the verb of one of the examples, are shorter than the active participle which has no intensity whatsoever? As for their saying: "The Most Merciful of this world and the Hereafter and the Most Compassionate of both," there is no indication in it of the intensity of the Most Merciful compared to the Most Compassionate, for its essence is that His mercy indicates its completeness.
(71) In the hadith: "The Most Merciful of this world and the Hereafter and Their Most Compassionate," this saying is weak.
(72) Al-Kashaf by al-Zamakhshari.
(73) Those who went to the meaning of specification said: "Allah is 'Most Merciful' to all people, but He is 'Most Compassionate' only to the believers." The Quran itself, which is the word of Allah, contradicts this claim; for there is no basis or evidence in the Quran for the assertion that Allah is "Most Compassionate" only to the believers. Allah, Exalted is He, has clarified that He is "Most Compassionate" "to people" in general: ﴾Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you whatever is in the earth and the ships that sail in the sea by His command, and He restrains the heaven from falling upon the earth except by His permission? Indeed, Allah is to the people, Kind and Merciful﴿ [Al-Hajj: 65].
