Al-Razi said: In this surah, there are two words attributed to the name of Allah and two names attributed to others: As for the two words attributed to the name of Allah, they are His saying: "In the name of Allah" and His saying: "All praise is due to Allah." The phrase "In the name of Allah" is for the beginning of matters, and the phrase "All praise is due to Allah" is for the conclusion of matters. Thus, "In the name of Allah" is a mention (dhikr), and "All praise is due to Allah" is a form of gratitude (shukr). So when He said "In the name of Allah," He deserved mercy, and when He said "All praise is due to Allah," He deserved another mercy. Therefore, by saying "In the name of Allah," He deserved mercy from the name of the All-Merciful (al-Rahman), and by saying "All praise is due to Allah," He deserved mercy from the name of the Most Merciful (al-Rahim). For this reason, it is said: O All-Merciful of this world and Most Merciful of the Hereafter(88)
Indeed, the words "the Most Merciful (al-Rahman)" and "the Most Compassionate (al-Rahim)" are derived from "mercy (rahma)", which is the source. The root of the word is "R H M" and its verb is "rahima". The active participle in this context is "the one who shows mercy (al-Rahim)" and "the Most Merciful (al-Rahman)" and "the Most Compassionate (al-Rahim)".
The term "الرحمان" (the Most Gracious), whose root is "الرحمان" (the Gracious), is built on the pattern "فَعْلاَن" (fa'lan); and this pattern, which includes an additional long alif and a nun at the end of a three-letter root word, indicates abundance, emphasis, and exaggeration. The exaggeration comes in both the giving and the permanence of the giving..
Al-Nasafi said: "The Most Merciful (al-Rahman) means, according to the people of language, the one who has mercy that has no limit thereafter, for the form 'fa'lan' is from the patterns of intensity. You say: 'A man is thirsty' if he is at the height of thirst(89). The form 'fa'lan' also conveys the meaning of occurrence, renewal, and fullness with the description. Here, in the term 'al-Rahman', it is a description that evokes fear, as the thirsty among creatures, when they drink, become quenched, and thus their thirst is removed. The angry person, when he refrains from anger, becomes pleased. Likewise, conditions are renewed for creatures. The description of 'al-Rahman' relates to humans with their varying inclinations and actions, so it has states according to its relation to those who are the recipients of that mercy. You find that 'al-Rahman' shows compassion and tenderness towards those who deserve mercy, and He is severe in punishment towards those who deserve punishment. A person becomes apprehensive if he realizes that he may do something that causes the attribute of 'al-Rahman' to change regarding him, so he may not attain that mercy. However, its foundation is based on permanence and continuity. The attributes that come in the form 'fa'lan' vary in change according to what they relate to. Joy occurs and quickly fades away, while some attributes, like hunger and satiety, take longer to fade. The foundation of 'al-Rahman' is based on permanence and continuity."
As for the term "Rahim" (رحيم), it is built on the pattern "Fa'il" (فعيل), and this pattern, that is, the addition of a long vowel (ya) between the second letter (ح) and the third letter (م) of the root indicates distinction and exaggeration, meaning that its possessor is characterized by that attribute to the extent that it has become predominant over him, similar to "Hakim" (حكيم), "Alim" (عليم), "Sami" (سميع), and "Hafiz" (حفيظ). Abu al-Ala al-Mubarakpuri said: ﴾The Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate﴿ are two names derived from mercy, like "Nadman" (ندمان) and "Nadim" (نديم).
__________
(88) The Interpretation of the Keys of the Unseen.
(89) The Tafsir of al-Nasafi
