They are both forms of hyperbole (mubalaghah),(90) meaning that they indicate permanence in the attribute. The one who hears the attribute of the Most Merciful (al-Rahman) fears that he may commit acts that would disqualify him from deserving entry into this mercy. He then hears afterwards the attribute of permanence in mercy, that is, the attribute of the Most Compassionate (al-Rahim), which reassures his soul.
Thus, al-Rahman indicates renewal, while al-Rahim indicates permanence. The Exalted One has come with two attributes that indicate both renewal and permanence together. If He had said only al-Rahman, the listener might assume that this attribute is transient and could vanish, just as hunger disappears from the hungry and anger from the angry, and so forth. If He had said only al-Rahim, it would be understood that while the attribute of al-Rahim is indeed permanent, it is not necessarily always manifest.(91)
Al-Rahman and al-Rahim are two attributes of the Lord, Exalted is He, meaning they are names from the Most Beautiful Names of Allah, and attributes of Allah, Blessed and Exalted. We will pause briefly on the topic of attributes here, as it serves the interpretation of Surah al-Fatiha, with the intention of dedicating a lengthy discussion to it in the appendices of this blessed interpretation, with Allah's permission. We say, and with Allah's guidance:
Allah, Glorified be He, said: ﴾And to Allah belong the best names, so invoke Him by them﴿, and He, Exalted is He, said: ﴾Say, "Invoke Allah or invoke the Most Merciful (al-Rahman). Whichever [name] you invoke - to Him belong the best names"﴿, and He said: ﴾And mention the name of Allah upon it﴿, and He said: ﴾To Him belong the best names﴿.
Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Ahmad Abdan al-Ahwazi informed us, Ahmad ibn Ubaid al-Saffar informed us, Tamtam Muhammad ibn Ghalib informed us, Muslim ibn Ibrahim informed us, Shu'bah narrated to us, from Abdul Malik ibn Umair, from Rabi'ah, from Hudhayfah: that the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) would say when he went to his bed: "O Allah, in Your name I live and in Your name I die," and when he awoke, he would say: "Praise be to Allah who has given us life after He caused us to die, and to Him is the return."(92)
Imam al-Bayhaqi said: In affirming His names, there is an affirmation of His attributes, because if it is established that He exists, and He is described as Living, then He is described with an additional attribute to the essence, which is life. If He is described as Able, then He is described with an additional attribute, which is ability. If He is described as Knowing, then He is described with an additional attribute, which is knowledge. Similarly, if He is described as Creator, then He is described with an additional attribute, which is creation. If He is described as Provider, then He is described with an additional attribute, which is provision. If He is described as Giver of Life, then He is described with an additional attribute, which is giving life. For without these meanings, His names would be limited to those that indicate the existence of the essence only, and then the attributes of Allah, Exalted is He.
__________
(90) Tuhfat al-Ahwazi, Sharh Sunan al-Tirmidhi by al-Mubarakfuri.
(91) Fadil al-Samarrai, Lamassat Bayaniyyah.
(92) Narrated by Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Ismail al-Ju'fi al-Bukhari in al-Jami al-Sahih, from Muslim ibn Ibrahim, and narrated by Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri from another source, from Shu'bah ibn al-Hajjaj; see the Names and Attributes by Imam al-Bayhaqi.
