In the tongue, it corresponds to the intention of the heart, which is that there should be no mention in the heart except Allah, Exalted is He. Among the omissions is also the omission of the alif in "Bismillah" and in "الرحمن" in writing, due to frequent usage.(95)

﴾All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿
From Abu Malik, who said: The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Purity is half of faith, and praise be to Allah fills the scale, and glory be to Allah and praise be to Allah fill or will fill what is between the heavens and the earth. Prayer is light, charity is proof, patience is illumination, and the Qur'an is an argument for you or against you. Every person goes out, so he sells himself, either freeing it or bringing about its ruin." Narrated by Muslim.
﴾All praise is due to Allah﴿(96) encompasses all the attributes of perfection for which Allah deserves to have praise confined to Him, based on what the phrase ﴾All praise is due to Allah﴿ indicates regarding the exclusivity of the genus of praise to Him and His entitlement to that exclusivity.(97)
__________
(95) Interpretation of the vast sea with some modifications.
(96) He placed praise before it so that the supplicants would also include it in their supplications, following the manner of the eloquent Arabs when addressing the great ones, that they would begin their speech to them and their requests with praise and beautiful mention. Umayyah ibn Abi al-Salt praised Abdullah ibn Jud'an:
"Should I mention my need or has your modesty sufficed me? Your character is modesty.
If a person praises you one day, it suffices him from exposing himself to praise."
(97) Al-Tahrir wa al-Tanwir by Ibn Ashur, may Allah have mercy on him: The definite article here is a generic definition because the source here is essentially a substitute for the verb, thus it must be that which indicates the action and its essence indicates the genus. When the definite article is added, it serves to define its meaning because the article indicates the definition of the named. If the named is a genus, then the article indicates its definition. The meaning of defining the genus is that this genus is known to the listener, so when you say "All praise is due to Allah" or "How amazing you are," it is as if you intend that this genus is known to you and your interlocutor and is not confused with anything else.
