Ibn al-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) said: In mentioning these names after praise, and attributing praise to their content and meaning, it indicates that He is praised in His divinity, praised in His lordship(98), praised in His mercy, praised in His sovereignty, and that He is a praised God, a praised Lord, a praised Merciful, and a praised Sovereign. Thus, He possesses all forms of perfection, the perfection of this name alone, and the perfection of the conjunction of one with the other.(99)
And the statement of Ibn al-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) above is a solid statement, for Allah, as we have explained before, means the one who is truly worshipped, that is, the one who is worshipped in truth. So when you say: ﴾All praise is due to Allah﴿, it is for what He deserves of praise in the station of divinity, that is, the sincerity of worship to Him, Exalted is He(100). Every action you perform intending His noble face, being sincere in religion to Him, then He, Exalted and Almighty, follows it with the description: ﴾Lord of the worlds﴿, to also include in the praise the station of lordship, and what
__________
(98) There is much discussion in this regard about what is called: the oneness of divinity (tawhid al-uluhiyya), the oneness of lordship (tawhid al-rububiyya), and the oneness of names and attributes (tawhid al-asma wa al-sifat), which is what the school of the eminent scholar Ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him) advocates. I will convey some quotes from his words (may Allah have mercy on him) to clarify the correct methodology in dealing with this issue, as he says:
Imam Ibn Taymiyyah said in Majmu' al-Fatawa, volume one: And the fact that they are servants may be their acknowledgment of the Creator and their submission to Him, even if they are disbelievers, as in His saying: ﴾And most of them do not believe in Allah except while they associate others with Him﴿. And he (may Allah have mercy on him) said in Majmu' al-Fatawa, volume two: As for the oneness of divinity, it is the predominant general polytheism, which has entered those who acknowledge that there is no creator but Allah, and no Lord other than Him from among the types of polytheists, as Allah said: ﴾And most of them do not believe in Allah except while they associate others with Him﴿, as we have elaborated on this in other contexts.
He said in Majmu' al-Fatawa, volume eleven: As for [the oneness of lordship], it is the acknowledgment that He is the Creator of everything, and this has been acknowledged by the polytheists, of whom Allah said: ﴾And most of them do not believe in Allah except while they associate others with Him﴿. Ibn Abbas said: You ask them who created the heavens and the earth? They say: Allah, while they worship others.
He said in Majmu' al-Fatawa, volume fourteen: The second case is that of disbelievers, sinners, and wrongdoers who have some belief in Him, even if they are disbelievers, as He said: ﴾And most of them do not believe in Allah except while they associate others with Him﴿. They are believers in His lordship, but they are polytheists in His worship, as the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said to Husayn al-Khaza'i: “O Husayn, how many do you worship?” He said: Seven deities; six on earth and one in the sky. He said: “Then who do you call upon for your desires and fears?” He said: The one in the sky. He said: “Embrace Islam until I teach you a word that will benefit you from Allah.” So he embraced Islam, and he said: “Say: O Allah, inspire me with guidance, and protect me from the evil of my soul.” Narrated by Ahmad and others.
He said in volume sixteen: If it is said: The polytheist worships Allah and others, as evidenced by the saying of the Friend (Abraham): ﴾Have you seen what you and your forefathers used to worship? They are an enemy to me except for the Lord of the worlds﴿ [Ash-Shu'ara: 75, 77], he has excluded what they worship, which indicates that they were worshipping Allah. Likewise, his saying: ﴾And when Abraham said to his father and his people: Indeed, I am disassociated from what you worship﴿ [Az-Zukhruf: 26, 27] is said to be the saying of the polytheists, just as the Jews and Christians say: We worship Allah. They think that worshipping Him alongside polytheism is worship, but they are lying in this. As for the saying of the Friend, there are two opinions; one group said it is an exception that is disconnected, and Abdul Rahman ibn Zayd said: They worshipped Allah alongside their deities. Based on this, this is a restricted wording. For he said: ﴾What you worship﴿. He called it worship when the intended meaning is known, but it is not the worship that is considered worship by Allah. For as He said: “I am free of partners from polytheism. Whoever does an action and associates others with Me, I am free of him, and it is all for the one who associated.” This is similar to His saying: ﴾And most of them do not believe in Allah except while they associate others with Him﴿. He called it belief with restriction, otherwise the polytheist who has made another deity alongside Allah does not fall under the definition of belief in general. And He said: ﴾They believe in al-jibt and al-taghut﴿ [An-Nisa: 51], ﴾So give them tidings of a painful punishment﴿ [At-Tawbah: 34]. This is with restriction. And with generality. So belief is belief in Allah, and the glad tidings are for goodness.
This last quotation is the best response from Ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah have mercy on him) to himself in the first three quotations, for it is not correct to describe disbelievers as having the oneness of lordship, as the text of the Qur'an contradicts this in many places: ﴾Should they not prostrate to Allah, who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth﴿, ﴾And He does not command you to take the angels and the prophets as lords﴿, ﴾Are there many lords differing better or Allah, the One, the Subduer﴿, ﴾And they disbelieve in the Most Merciful; say: He is my Lord﴿, and as for them, they did not make Him a Lord. ﴾By Allah, we were in clear error when we equated you with the Lord of the worlds﴿, and the context is too narrow to elaborate on that. The important thing is that they do not have the oneness of lordship; rather, they are disbelievers and polytheists, having neither any belief nor partial belief. It is not sufficient for a person to say that Allah is the Creator and that provision is from Him for us to say that they are monotheists in lordship, as they believe that their idols can harm and benefit, and this is what falls under the concept of lordship, according to the division that states that lordship is the actions that occur from the Lord towards His servants, and divinity is the oneness of Allah in worship and sincerity, and that everything a servant does towards his Lord is to unify Him in it. Thus, the conclusion is that disbelievers do not have the oneness of lordship nor any belief, and this is what we aim to convey in this context.
(99) Madarij al-Salikin
(100) See the appendix on worship and servitude in this book.
