His saying "I bear witness" is why Allah, Exalted is He, said in refutation of the hypocrites: ﴾And Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars﴿ (al-Munafiqun, verse 1)(105)
Moreover, "All praise is due to Allah" has been repeated in four surahs of the Qur'an(106), each one referring to a fundamental blessing, which are: the first creation, and the sustenance therein; and the second creation, and the sustenance thereafter.
Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayini (may Allah have mercy on him) said: In Surah "al-An'am" are all the principles of monotheism. And since His blessings are beyond enumeration, they generally return to creation and sustenance in the first existence, and creation and sustenance in the afterlife. The first sustenance is alluded to in "al-Fatiha" and "al-Kahf", the second creation in "Saba", and the second sustenance in "Fatir", which is why these five surahs begin with praise(107)
﴾To Allah﴿ The "lam" (108): is for ownership and its like, meaning for exclusivity. Ibn Ashour said: And it is not the definite article "lam" (in ﴾al-hamd﴿) for generality, as you know it is the "lam" of kind. Therefore, the author of al-Kashaf said: "And the generality that many people mistakenly assume is not the case" while the meaning of generality is present here by example, because the ruling of the exclusivity of the kind of praise to Him is established by the presence of the "lam" of the kind in the phrase ﴾al-hamd﴿ and the "lam" of exclusivity in the phrase ﴾to Allah﴿, which necessitates the restriction of the instances of praise to the name of Allah, Exalted is He, because if the kind is exclusive, the instances are also exclusive; for if an instance of praise for someone other than Allah were to occur, the kind would be realized within it, thus the meaning of the exclusivity of the kind derived from the "lam" of exclusivity entering upon the name of the Divine would not be valid(109) ﴾Al-hamd﴿ is the subject, and ﴾to Allah﴿ is the predicate, and its original form is accusative, and it has been recited in that way, and the original is: I praise Allah with praise, and it has been shifted to the nominative to indicate the generality of praise and its permanence, without its renewal and occurrence(110), and it teaches the wording while implying self-sufficiency. That is: Praise is for Allah even if you do not praise Him,
__________
(105) Dr. Fadl al-Samarrai, Linguistic Touches.
(106) They are: al-An'am, al-Kahf, Saba, Fatir.
(107) The commentary of Shihab on Surah al-An'am, vol. 4, p. 2, from the indications of miraculousness in the contexts of brevity by Badi' al-Zaman Said Nursi.
(108) The "lam" in ﴾to Allah﴿: is for ownership and its like, for possession and its like, for deserving and for lineage, for reasoning, for conveying, for amazement, for clarification, for becoming, for circumstantial meaning like in or at or after, for ending, and for superiority, like: that wealth is for Zaid, it lasts for you, what lasts for me, and I gifted you a dinar ﴾He made for you from yourselves spouses﴿ the veil for the maiden, for Zaid, uncle, ﴾To judge between the people﴿ women, I told you, and to Allah are eyes that have seen superiority ﴾Here is for you﴿ Yusuf ﴾To be for them an enemy and a grief﴿ al-Qasas ﴾The balance for the Day of Resurrection﴿ written for five that have passed, ﴾At the decline of the sun﴿ ﴾We drove it to a dead land﴿ ﴾They fall upon their chins﴿ al-Isra. Tafsir al-Bahr al-Muhit.
(109) Al-Tahrir wa al-Tanwir.
(110) If you said: I praise Allah, it would imply renewal and occurrence, meaning that I am praising Allah now, for a blessing I mentioned, and I praised Allah for it, but the phrase: Praise is for Allah implies the permanence and generality of praise.
