And they harm them, so the reality of lordship (rububiyya) was not absolute and clear to them, and where ﴾Indeed, Allah does not forgive that partners be associated with Him, but He forgives what is less than that for whom He wills. And whoever associates partners with Allah has certainly committed a great sin (48)﴿ Al-Nisa, these people did not truly appreciate Allah as He deserves, and their deeds were rendered void, and their claim that Allah is the Provider and the Creator did not benefit them at all, as there must be pure monotheism (tawhid) free from polytheism (shirk), and a clear and correct understanding of the Lord, Exalted is He, in order for the reality of monotheism to be realized.
Indeed, the martyr Sayyid Qutb (may Allah have mercy on him) was correct when he considered absolute lordship (rububiyya) to be the dividing line between the clarity of comprehensive monotheism (tawhid) and those whose hearts are clouded in their perception of this lordship by confusion, polytheistic notions, and a heap of falsehood that obstructs them from the correct understanding.
He, may Allah have mercy on him, said in conclusion: "The invocation of Lordship in this surah, and the comprehensiveness of this Lordship for all the worlds, is the dividing line between order and chaos in belief, so that all worlds may turn to one Lord, acknowledging Him with absolute sovereignty, and shake off the burden of scattered lords, and the confusion as well among various lords. Then, let the conscience of these worlds find reassurance in Allah's constant care and His established Lordship. And that this care never ceases, nor diminishes, nor disappears."(119)
So who is ﴾Lord of the Worlds﴿ then?
We stood before the overall and linguistic meaning of the word "Lord" (Rabb), so what is the reality of the need of the worlds for a Lord who manages their affairs by night and day, and directs the matters of this universe? He, Exalted is He, says: ﴾Say, "To whom belongs the earth and whoever is in it, if you should know?" (84) They will say, "To Allah." Say, "Then will you not remember?" (85) Say, "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Great Throne?" (86) They will say, "To Allah." Say, "Then will you not fear Him?" (87) Say, "In whose hand is the dominion of all things, and He protects while none can protect against Him, if you should know?" (88) They will say, "To Allah." Say, "Then how are you deluded?" (89) Rather, We have brought them the truth, and indeed they are liars. (90) Allah has not taken a son, and there has not been with Him any deity. If there had been, then each deity would have certainly taken what it created, and some of them would have overpowered others. Exalted is Allah above what they describe. (91) Knower of the unseen and the witnessed; so Exalted is He above what they associate. (92)﴿
Indeed, the Lord, Exalted is He, is the One who created the heavens and the earth, and determined therein their sustenance and the provisions of the creatures. He sends down the rain, causes the crops to grow, brings forth the hidden treasures from the earth, gives life and causes death, heals, and takes vengeance. There is no good except that its return is to the Lord; it descends from Him and is connected through His mercy. He sent down the best of laws so that the lives of people may be established with justice, and He prohibited injustice for Himself, making it forbidden in the heavens and the earth. He grants protection and is not to be protected against. Thus, He deserves all praise for His countless blessings and favors, to the extent that the Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him)
__________
(119) In the Shade of the Qur'an
