Those who are the realm of humans, the realm of jinn, and the realm of angels, and it may also be said: however, the choice of the two worlds over the realms is for a rhetorical reason that indicates the specificity of the accountable and those of reason (it does not include the non-reasoning) as evidenced by His saying, Exalted is He, ﴾Blessed is He who sent down upon His Servant the Criterion to be for the worlds a warner﴿ (al-Furqan 1). It is certain that it is not a warning for animals and inanimate objects, and with this, they deduced that the intended meaning of "the worlds" is those of reason and those of knowledge or the accountable.
And this is what we do not prefer here, as some scholars say: "The masculine sound plural is the plural of rational beings and is used when there is a mixture between rational beings and others as well." However, due to the importance of rational beings over others - because reason is the basis of obligation - the form of the plural in the masculine sound is the chosen one,
And this is what we lean towards, as the mention of it in the form of the masculine plural serves to indicate the meaning of the rational beings, encompassing both the rational beings and others, which is suitable for the context of the surah when viewed from the perspective that revolves around the accountable beings, as it contains a request for guidance and the expression of servitude to Allah and the request for assistance. Such matters are specific to those with intellect and knowledge; therefore, it was appropriate to choose "the worlds" (al-alamin) over other terms or words, to refer to the rational beings, in the context of accountability, guidance, assistance, and other matters that pertain to the rational beings. However, this is also complicated by looking at the context of the surah from another angle, which reveals that it also includes other creatures of Allah, Exalted is He, all of which are under the dominion of Allah, and for which He deserves praise for the blessings He has bestowed upon them, and they fall under His general mercy, Exalted is He, and He manages their affairs from the perspective of lordship, just as animals live by the blessings of Allah. Therefore, the term "the worlds" here should not be limited to rational beings alone, and Allah knows best.
At the end of Al-Fatiha, there is mention of those who have incurred wrath, and they are the Jews, and ﴾the worlds﴿ is a response to the Jews who claimed that Allah, Exalted is He, is only the Lord of the Jews. Thus, ﴾Lord of the worlds﴿ came to encompass all of the worlds, not just some of them.

﴾The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful﴿
And ﴾The Most Merciful, The Most Compassionate﴿ in the basmala has a meaning different from ﴾The Most Merciful, The Most Compassionate﴿ in the Fatiha. In the basmala, it reminds us of Allah's mercy (Exalted is He) and forgiveness so that we do not feel ashamed or afraid to seek help by invoking the name of Allah even if we have committed a sin. Allah (Exalted is He) wants us to always seek help by His name in all our actions. If one of us falls into a sin, he might say: "How can I seek help by the name of Allah when I have disobeyed Him?" We say to him: Enter upon Him (Exalted is He) through the door of mercy, and He will forgive you, and you will seek help from Him, and He will respond to you.
But ﴾The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful﴿ in the Opening (Al-Fatiha) is coupled with "Lord of the Worlds," who brought you into existence from non-existence, and provided you.
