And His saying, Exalted is He: ﴾So follow him and do not follow the other paths﴿, He has unified His path; because the truth is one, and for this reason, He has gathered the paths; to indicate their divergence and branching; as He, Exalted is He, said:
﴾Allah is the ally of those who believe. He brings them out of darkness into light. And those who disbelieve, their allies are the tyrants. They bring them out of light into darkness. It is they who are the companions of the Fire; they will abide therein forever.﴿ Al-Baqarah. For this reason, the Exalted One used the singular term for light (nur) and the plural for darkness (dhulumat), because the truth is one, while disbelief has many forms. And Allah, Exalted is He, said:
﴾And He made the darkness and the light﴿, and He, Exalted is He, said: "And those who denied Our signs are deaf and dumb in the darkness. Whomever Allah wills, He leads astray, and whomever He wills, He places on a straight path." (39) Al-An'am
Abdullah ibn Mas'ud said regarding the verse ﴾Guide us to the straight path﴿ that it refers to the Qur'an, saying: "Guide us to its knowledge"(140).
﴾Indeed, my Lord is on a straight path.﴿
When a believer calls upon their Lord in prayer to guide them to the straight path, they are asking Him to place them on a great matter that the Lord of Glory has described Himself as being upon, and He has described His prophets (peace be upon them) as being upon it. He has made clear that the call of those prophets is indeed to this straight path, and that they guide towards it. Reflect on the greatness of this matter; the Lord of Glory, Exalted is He, says:
﴾Indeed, I have placed my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. There is no creature but He takes it by the forelock. Indeed, my Lord is on a straight path (56)﴿ Hud. The meaning is that Allah, Exalted is He, although He is capable of everything, does not act except with justice; and the straight path is a metaphor for actions that conform to justice and wisdom; because justice is likened to straightness and equality. It is said that its meaning is that there is no flaw in His management, nor disparity in His creation, Exalted is He. Thus, His methodology, which He has revealed, is without flaw or disparity, and His actions, Exalted is He, are in accordance with justice and wisdom. It is fitting for us to understand that the ultimate goal is to elevate our actions to align with the correct path that the Lord of the worlds has chosen for Himself and His messengers.
Thus, when we ask Allah to guide us to the straight path, we are indeed asking Him to take us by the hand to that great and significant matter, to direct our journey on the right path in the most upright manner and in the highest form(141).
__________
(140) Al-Burhan fi Ulum al-Quran by al-Zarkashi
(141) A parallel to this understanding is found in what was narrated from the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him), in what he reported from Allah, Exalted is He, that He said: "O My servants! I have forbidden oppression upon Myself and made it forbidden among you. So do not oppress one another. O My servants! All of you are misguided except for those whom I have guided. So seek guidance from Me, and I will guide you. O My servants! All of you are hungry except for those whom I have fed. So seek food from Me, and I will feed you. O My servants! All of you are naked except for those whom I have clothed. So seek clothing from Me, and I will clothe you. O My servants! You commit sins by night and by day, and I forgive all sins. So seek My forgiveness, and I will forgive you. O My servants! You will not reach My harm so as to harm Me, and you will not reach My benefit so as to benefit Me. O My servants! If the first of you and the last of you, your humans and your jinn, were to be as pious as the heart of the most pious man among you, it would not increase My dominion in anything. O My servants! If the first of you and the last of you, your humans and your jinn, were to be as wicked as the heart of the most wicked man among you, it would not decrease My dominion in anything. O My servants! If the first of you and the last of you, your humans and your jinn, stood in one place and asked Me, and I gave every person what they asked for, it would not decrease what I have except as a needle decreases when it is put into the sea. O My servants! Your deeds are recorded for you. Then I will give you your due. So whoever finds good, let him praise Allah. And whoever finds otherwise, let him blame no one but himself." In another narration: "I have forbidden oppression upon Myself and upon My servants. So do not oppress one another." Narrated by Abu Dharr al-Ghafari, reported by Muslim - source: Sahih Muslim - So, whoever knows that Allah, Exalted is He, has forbidden oppression upon Himself, how can his soul allow him to commit oppression and enter into injustice in His dominion, when He has forbidden it upon Himself and upon His servants?
