﴾Indeed, you are among the messengers (3) on a straight path (4)﴿ Yasin, ﴾Indeed, Ibrahim was a nation, obedient to Allah, inclining toward truth, and he was not of the polytheists (120) grateful for His favors; He chose him and guided him to a straight path (121)﴿ An-Nahl. Thus, reaching the straight path is a great blessing that Allah chooses His elite creation for, may Allah make us and you among them.
﴾Say, "Indeed, my Lord has guided me to a straight path, a correct religion, the religion of Ibrahim, inclining toward truth, and he was not of the polytheists (161)﴿ Al-An'am, perhaps this is a summary of the description of the religion that Allah revealed to His Messenger, as it is the straight path of Allah!
﴾And indeed, you invite them to a straight path (73)﴿ Al-Mu'minun
﴾And thus We have revealed to you a Spirit by Our command. You did not know what the Book was, nor what faith was, but We made it a light by which We guide whom We will of Our servants. And indeed, you guide to a straight path (52) the path of Allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. Indeed, to Allah belong all matters (53)﴿ Ash-Shura
﴾There has certainly come to you from Allah a light and a clear Book (15) by which Allah guides whoever follows His pleasure to the ways of peace and brings them out of darkness into light by His permission and guides them to a straight path (16)﴿ Al-Ma'idah, so the way to reach the straight path is one, which is to follow the methodology of truth and take it as a path (142), ﴾And follow me; this is a straight path (61)﴿ Az-Zukhruf, and this matter is not easy; rather, a person must hold onto it with both hands and cling to it, otherwise it will slip from his grasp and expose him to the danger of slipping into the paths of destruction: ﴾So hold firmly to that which has been revealed to you. Indeed, you are upon a straight path (43)﴿ Az-Zukhruf, then a person must equip himself with worship, ﴾Indeed, Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path (64)﴿ Az-Zukhruf, to assist him in clinging to this guidance: ﴾And whoever holds firmly to Allah has certainly been guided to a straight path (101)﴿ Al-Imran, and the straight path is the criterion between those who realize the purpose of their existence in life and draw from their sustenance while understanding the truth, feeling secure in it, not preoccupying themselves with trivial matters, for while he walks on a straight path, he sees with his far-sighted insight what those who walk with their heads bowed toward the ground do not see, as trivial matters distract them from the great ones, and they do not see a purpose for their lives, so surely the state of this one is different from that one!
﴾Is he who walks prone on his face more guided, or he who walks upright on a straight path? (22)﴿ Al-Mulk
A man whom Allah has associated with His dominion!!
This straight path of Allah, and His straight methodology, is the safeguard against injustice on earth and the protection from the oppression of people against one another. Just as an individual can be on a straight path, an entire nation can also be on a straight path by applying the methodology of its Lord in its life, so reflect with me on what I will say to you:
__________
(142) ﴾I will turn away from My signs those who are arrogant in the earth without right. And if they see every sign, they will not believe in them; and if they see the path of righteousness, they will not take it as a path; and if they see the path of error, they will take it as a path. That is because they denied Our signs and were heedless of them (146)﴿ Al-A'raf
