Ibn Qutaybah al-Dinuri mentioned in his book "Imamate and Politics" that Ibrahim ibn Muslim informed them about Rija' ibn Haywah, who looked at Tawus al-Yamani praying in the Sacred Mosque. Rija' then went to Suleiman ibn Abdul Malik, who was at that time in Mecca having performed the pilgrimage that year. He said: "I saw Tawus in the mosque; would you like to send for him?" Suleiman then sent for him. When Tawus came to him, Rija' said to Suleiman: "O Commander of the Faithful, do not ask him about anything until he speaks first." When Tawus sat down, he remained silent for a long time. Then he said: "What is the first thing that was created?" We said: "We do not know." He said: "The first thing that was created is the pen." Then he said: "Do you know what was the first thing written?" We said: "No." He said: "The first thing that was written was 'In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful,' then he wrote the decree of good and evil until the Day of Judgment." Then he said: "Do you know who the most hated of creation to Allah is?" We said: "No." He said: "The most hated of creation to Allah, Exalted is He, is a servant whom Allah has associated with His dominion, so he acted in disobedience to Him." Then he stood up. Rija' said: "The house became dark to me, and I kept fearing for him until he disappeared. I saw Suleiman scratching his head with his hand, until I feared that his nails would injure the flesh of his head."
This was narrated by Tawus al-Yamani (may Allah be pleased with him) from his son Abdullah ibn Tawus. It has been mentioned in Shadharat al-Dhahab and in many books of history and biographies. Ziyad narrated from Malik ibn Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) who said: When Abu Ja'far sent for Malik ibn Anas and Ibn Tawus in the year 142 AH, he said: We entered upon him while he was sitting on cushions, and before him were mats spread out, and there were guards with swords in their hands striking necks. He gestured for us to sit, so we sat down. He was silent for a long time, then he raised his head and turned to Ibn Tawus and said: "Tell me about your father." He said: I heard my father say: The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "The person who will suffer the most severe punishment on the Day of Resurrection is a man whom Allah has associated with His sovereignty, and he has introduced injustice into his judgment." Abu Ja'far remained silent for a while until the space between us turned dark, Malik said: I gathered my garments in fear that his blood might touch me, thinking that al-Mansur would surely kill him. Then al-Mansur said to Abdullah: "Hand me that inkpot," three times, but he did not do so. He said to him: "Why did you not hand me the inkpot?" He said: "I fear that you will write a sin with it, and I would have participated in it." When he heard that, he said to them: "Get away from me." Abdullah said: "This is what we sought." Malik said: "From that day on, I continued to recognize the virtue of Ibn Tawus."
It was mentioned in Al-Durr Al-Manthoor by Al-Suyuti and narrated by Ibn Abi Shayba, and in Sunan Al-Tirmidhi: from Amr ibn Al-Harith ibn Al-Mustalaq who said, "It was said that the two most severely punished people on the Day of Resurrection are: a woman who disobeys her husband and a leader of a people whom they dislike." Then Hanad said, Jareer said, Mansour said, "We asked about the matter of the leader, and it was said to us that this refers to oppressive leaders, but as for one who upholds the Sunnah, then the sin is upon the one who dislikes him." It came in Tuhfat Al-Ahwathi: Al-Iraqi said, "This is like the saying of the companion, 'We used to say and we used to do.' Indeed, Amr ibn Al-Harith was a companion and he is the brother of Juwayriya bint Al-Harith, one of the Mothers of the Believers. If it is taken to mean the elevated form, it is as if he said, 'It was said to us,' and the speaker is the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him)."
Ahmad and al-Bazzar narrated from the hadith of Ibn Mas'ud, as a statement: “The people who will suffer the most torment on the Day of Resurrection are those who killed a prophet or were killed by a prophet and an unjust leader.” Zain al-Hafiz al-Iraqi said in his commentary on al-Tirmidhi that its chain of narration is authentic.
