And the Lord of the worlds, who is the most truthful of speakers, said: ﴾Mankind was one community, and Allah sent the prophets as bearers of good news and as warners, and He sent down with them the Book in truth to judge between the people concerning that in which they differed.﴿ 213 Al-Baqarah. And He, Exalted is He, said: ﴾Indeed, We have sent down to you the Book in truth so that you may judge between the people by what Allah has shown you, and do not be an advocate for the treacherous.﴿ 105 An-Nisa.
In addition to this, it is commanded that the sovereignty of the Sharia (Islamic law) should dominate the relationships between the ruler and the ruled, as He said: ﴾O you who have believed, obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. And if you disagree over anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger if you should believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is the best [way] and best in result.﴿ (59)
Thus, it is commanded that the ruled and the rulers, if they dispute over something, should refer it to the judgment of the Sharia, and this is made a sign of faith, as He said: ﴾So refer it to Allah and the Messenger﴿, and He followed that with: ﴾If you should believe in Allah and the Last Day.﴿ He did not stop there but praised this action by saying: ﴾That is the best [way] and best in result.﴿ This indicates His emphasis and insistence on referring matters to the judgment of the Sharia, and this is one of the most eloquent encouragements to realize the sovereignty of the Sharia. Through all of this, the importance of establishing the sovereignty of the Sharia in the view of Islam becomes clear.
Moreover, Allah has linked obedience to Him and obedience to His Messenger with obedience to those in authority among us, because those in authority, as Ibn Tawus reported from his father, are included in His dominion. In another narration, in His kingdom, meaning He made them successors who rule by what has been revealed from justice so that people may uphold equity. If they introduce injustice upon the people, then the people will not uphold what Allah has created them for and revealed to them of His laws to establish. Thus, these rulers would have introduced injustice against the Exalted One, so what could be more grievous than that!
If people refer to the Sharia of Allah, justice will prevail, and the heavens and the earth will be established in truth, and Allah's grace will descend upon creation, in accordance with His saying: ﴾And if they had remained steadfast on the right course, We would have given them abundant water to drink.﴿
So when their rulers introduce injustice and transgress and oppress, they distance the people from uprightness. If the people do not hold their rulers accountable to guide them towards the truth, the truth will be lost, and the heavens and the earth will be corrupted. Injustice will enter the earth, sanctities will be violated, rights will be infringed upon, and judgments will be corrupted. Injustice will enter the dominion of the earth, and Allah, Exalted is He, has decreed upon the creation, both rulers and ruled, to uphold equity and to walk on the straight path. Yet, some have refused, and some have turned back, leading to the emergence of injustice, and the paths of Satan have appeared in place of Allah's straight path, and those who slip have fallen into them. Thus, Allah's wrath intensifies, and His punishment becomes severe: ﴾And whoever turns away from My remembrance, indeed, he will have a depressed life.﴿
The issue of ruling by what Allah has revealed is of such gravity that there is hardly any other issue that can compare in danger. Either the rule of Allah will prevail on earth, leading to justice, or injustice will be introduced against Allah by rulers who are originally meant to govern as successors on earth to uphold equity, or by ruled individuals who have accepted to be governed by other than Allah's law, thus consenting to allow other than Allah's justice to prevail on earth: ﴾So let those who oppose His command beware lest a trial strike them or a painful punishment befall them.﴿
