The Virtues of Surah Al-Fatiha
The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "By the One in Whose hand is my soul, nothing has been revealed in the Torah, nor in the Gospel, nor in the Psalms, nor in the Qur'an like it, and it is indeed the seven oft-repeated verses that Allah, Exalted is He, has given me" (14). This is a sound and authentic hadith.
Ibn Abbas said: "While the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) was with Gabriel, he heard a sound from above him. Gabriel raised his gaze to the sky and said: 'This is a door that has been opened from the heavens, which has never been opened before.' Then an angel descended from it and came to the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) and said: 'Rejoice in two lights that you have been given, which no prophet before you has been given: the opening of the Book and the last verses of Surah Al-Baqarah; you will not recite a letter from either of them except that you will be granted it'” (15). Authentic.
Abu Huraira said: The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "Whoever prays a prayer in which he does not recite the Opening of the Book, it is incomplete and not complete" (16).
Ibn al-Arabi said: "We have narrated from the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) and have transmitted to you, {that he said: Allah, Exalted is He, said: 'O son of Adam, I have revealed to you seven verses, three for Me and three for you, and one that is between Me and you; as for the three that are for Me: ﴾All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, Master of the Day of Judgment﴿ and as for the three that are for you: ﴾Guide us to the straight path, the path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, not of those who have evoked [Your] anger or of those who are astray﴿ and as for the one that is between Me and you: ﴾You alone we worship, and You alone we ask for help﴿} meaning: from the servant is worship, and from Allah, Exalted is He, is assistance" (17).
And from Abu Sa'id al-Khudri (may Allah be pleased with him): A group of the companions of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) set out on a journey, and when they stopped at a tribe of the Arabs, they asked for hospitality, but they refused to host them. The chief of that tribe was bitten by a snake, and they tried everything to help him, but nothing was of benefit. Some of them said: "If you go to those men who have settled among you, perhaps one of them has something." So they went to them and said: "O group, our chief has been bitten, and we have tried everything to help him, but nothing has worked. Does anyone among you have anything?" One of them said: "Yes, by Allah, I am a healer, but by Allah, we asked you for hospitality and you did not host us, so I will not heal him until you give us a reward." They agreed on a flock of sheep, and he went and began to spit and recite: "All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds," until it was as if he had been released from a restraint, and he walked away without any ailment (18).
__________
(14) Bukhari, Tafsir al-Qur'an (4427), Tirmidhi, Fada'il al-Qur'an (2875), Nasai, Al-Iftitah (914), Abu Dawood, Al-Salat (1457), Ahmad (2/357), Darimi, Fada'il al-Qur'an (3373).
(15) Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin wa Qasruha (806), Nasai, Al-Iftitah (912).
(16) Muslim, Al-Salat (395), Tirmidhi, Tafsir al-Qur'an (2953), Nasai, Al-Iftitah (909), Abu Dawood, Al-Salat (821), Ibn Majah, Iqamat al-Salat wa al-Sunnah fiha (838), Ahmad (2/286), Malik, Al-Nida' li al-Salat (189).
(17) Ahkam al-Qur'an by Ibn al-Arabi, and narrated by al-Tabarani.
(18) "Without any ailment" means: without pain or affliction.
