The scholars of language have mentioned that the difference between transitive verbs with a preposition and transitive verbs without a preposition is that transitivity with a preposition is used when guidance is not inherent in it, meaning that the one being guided was outside the path, so Allah guided him to it, and he reaches the guidance through it. Transitivity without a preposition is said for one who is either in the path or not in it, as in saying "I guided him to the path," where he may be in the path and we recognize him by it, or he may not be in the path and we direct him to it. ﴾So follow me; I will guide you to a straight path (43)﴿ (Maryam) indicates that the father of our master Ibrahim was not on the path, ﴾And We would have guided them to a straight path (68)﴿ (An-Nisa) and the hypocrites are not on the path. It has been used for those who are on the path ﴾And indeed, We have guided them to Our ways﴿ (Ibrahim 12) which was said about the messengers of Allah, Exalted is He, and Allah, Exalted is He, said addressing His Messenger ﴾And He will guide you to a straight path (2)﴿ (Al-Fath) and the Messenger is the possessor of the path. The verb used intransitively has been employed in both cases.
The prepositions "bi" (بـ) and "ila" (إلى): for those who are not on the path ﴾“So judge between us with truth and do not be unjust, and guide us to the straight path” (22)﴿ (Sad) ﴾“Say, ‘Is there any of your partners who guides to the truth?’ Say, ‘Allah guides to the truth. So is he who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed or he who does not guide unless he is guided? Then what is [the matter] with you? How do you judge?’” (35)﴿ (Yunus)
And He uses "guided him to it" to mean He made it clear to him, and guidance is on stages and not a single guidance. The one far from the path, the misguided, needs someone to bring him to it and show him the way (we use "guided him to it").
And whoever reaches the path needs a guide who knows the conditions of the path and the places of safety, salvation, and destruction for self-confidence. Then, if he traverses the path, in the end, he needs someone to show him his goal: we use the transitive verb by itself.
And finally: He, Exalted is He, used the lam: ﴾And they said, "Praise be to Allah, who has guided us to this, and we would not have been guided if Allah had not guided us"﴿ (al-A'raf 43). And this is the conclusion of the guidance.
We summarize what has been mentioned above as follows:
A person who is far away needs someone to guide him to the path; we use the transitive verb with "to".
- If he arrives and needs someone to inform him of the way and his conditions, we use the transitive verb by itself.
If one takes the path and needs someone to convey his intention, we use the transitive verb with "to".
Guidance with the preposition "lam" has never been used with "the path" (as-sabeel) or "the straight path" (as-sirat) in the Qur'an because "the straight path" is not an end but rather a means that leads to the end, and "lam" is only used when referring to the end. Allah, Exalted is He, has reserved guidance with "lam" for Himself alone or for the Qur'an because it is the culmination of all forms of guidance, as in His saying ﴾Indeed, this Qur'an guides to that which is most upright﴿ and His saying ﴾Allah guides to His light whom He wills﴿.
