And likewise, seeking assistance includes asking for guidance to the straight path ﴾the path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor﴿, meaning the path of those who have followed the straight path, ﴾not of those who have evoked [Your] anger﴿, and the misguided are those who have taken a path other than the straight path. Thus, guidance and misguidance are opposites, and the misguided are the opposite of those who have followed the straight path.

﴾the path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor﴿
﴾the path﴿ is a substitute for the first (meaning the straight path) - a complete substitution - and it is in the position of reiterating the action in that it is the intended reference. Its benefit is: the emphasis and specification that the path of the Muslims is the one that is affirmed to be upright, in the most certain and eloquent manner, because it is made like an explanation and clarification of it, as if it were from the evident that has no ambiguity in it, and that the straight path is what constitutes the way of the believers, and ﴾not of those who have evoked [Your] anger﴿ is a substitute for ﴾those﴿ in the sense that those who have been bestowed favor are those who are safe from anger and misguidance.
Or it is a description that clarifies or restricts in the sense that they combine between the absolute favor, which is the favor of faith, and safety from anger and misguidance, (149)
Ibn Ashur said: The intended meaning of those who have been bestowed favor is those upon whom complete blessings have been poured, and the full correspondence between those who have been bestowed favor and the guided ones is not hidden, thus in the substitution of ﴾the path of those﴿ from ﴾the straight path﴿ there is a beautiful meaning, which is that guidance is a blessing and that those who have been favored with complete blessings have been guided to the straight path. And those whom Allah has favored are the best of the previous nations from the messengers and prophets who have received complete blessings. (150) And those who follow them in righteousness until the Day of Judgment, and excellent are those as companions.
And ﴾those upon whom You have bestowed favor﴿ are those mentioned in Surah An-Nisa, where it says: ﴾And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger - those will be with the ones upon whom Allah has bestowed favor, among the prophets, the steadfast, the martyrs, and the righteous. And excellent are those as companions. * That is the bounty from Allah, and sufficient is Allah as Knower﴿ [An-Nisa: 69, 70].

Why did He say ﴾the path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, not of those who have evoked [Your] anger and not of the misguided﴿?
That is, why did He express those who have been favored using the verb ﴾You have bestowed favor﴿ while the angered and the misguided are expressed with the noun?
__________
(149) Al-Bahr Al-Madid by Ibn Ajibah.
(150) Al-Tahrir wa Al-Tanwir.
