Revenge against him varies, as the limit that arises in the soul during anger differs according to the varying capacities of souls to endure provocations and the differing customs in considering its causes. Perhaps those who made the desire for revenge a necessary condition for anger based their views on Arab traditions.
And since the reality of anger is impossible to attribute to Allah, Exalted is He, in its true sense due to the definitive evidence indicating His transcendence from inherent and accidental changes, it is incumbent upon the believer to divert the attribution of anger to Allah from its literal meaning(151). The method of the people of knowledge and reflection in this diversion is to interpret the term metaphorically through a necessary relationship or to use a euphemism that implies the necessary meaning. Thus, what is a characteristic of Allah from the meaning of anger is its necessary consequence, namely punishment and humiliation on the Day of Judgment and curse, which means being distanced from the people of faith and righteousness in this world, or it is of the nature of representation(152).

﴾The path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, not of those who have evoked [Your] anger, nor of those who are astray (7)﴿ Why is "those who have evoked [Your] anger" mentioned in the passive form while "those who are astray" is mentioned in the active participle form?
First, both are brought as nouns ﴾the ones who have incurred wrath﴿ and ﴾the misguided﴿ to indicate permanence; the wrath upon them is established, and the misguidance within them is established, with no hope for good or guidance from them. It does not say "the path of those who have incurred wrath and have gone astray," but rather ﴾the ones who have incurred wrath and the misguided﴿. Thus, both descriptions are presented in the nominal form to indicate the permanence of these two attributes in them. The question remains: why is "the ones who have incurred wrath" in the passive participle form and not "the angry" in the active participle form? "The ones who have incurred wrath" in the passive participle form means that wrath has fallen upon them, without mentioning the entity that has incurred wrath upon them, so that the wrath encompasses them from all sides—God's wrath and the wrath of those who are angry for God's sake from the angels and others. It is not specific to a particular angry entity; it is rather "the ones who have incurred wrath" from all directions. Indeed, these will be the ones upon whom their closest friends will be angry in the Hereafter ﴾And we do not see with you your intercessors whom you claimed were partners with you. Indeed, the ties between you have been severed, and what you used to claim has abandoned you (94)﴿ Al-An'am ﴾Then on the Day of Resurrection, some of you will disbelieve in others, and some of you will curse others (25)﴿ Al-Ankabut. Thus, "the ones who have incurred wrath" are from all sides, and the omission of the entity that is angry indicates generality and comprehensiveness. As for "the misguided," they are those who have gone astray.
So why was the path of those who have incurred wrath (al-maghdubi 'alayhim) mentioned before that of those who have gone astray (al-dallin)?
__________
(151) See the appendix on the rules of dealing with attributes in this book.
(152) The Liberation and Enlightenment by Ibn Ashour, may Allah have mercy on him.
