Some subtleties of Surah Al-Fatiha:
The beginning of the surah ﴾All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds﴿, and these are the first words of the Mushaf, which correspond to the last words of Surah An-Nas ﴾From among jinn and mankind﴿. Allah, Exalted is He, began with the worlds and concluded with jinn and mankind, meaning that this book contains guidance for all of Allah's creatures from jinn and mankind, and is not just for humans or for Muslims alone.
The last words of Surah Al-Fatiha are the statement of Allah ﴾Not of those who have evoked [Your] anger or of those who are astray﴿, and Surah Al-Baqarah follows it, discussing those who have evoked anger (the Children of Israel) and how they disobeyed their Lord and Messenger. Surah Al-Imran then speaks about those who are astray (the Christians).
The last words of Surah Al-Fatiha, which are a supplication, are connected to the beginning of Surah Al-Baqarah ﴾Guidance for the righteous﴿, as if ﴾Guide us to the straight path﴿ in Al-Fatiha is the guidance mentioned in Surah Al-Baqarah.
The rules of Tajweed in Surah Al-Fatiha are made easy, and there are none of the difficult rules; this, and Allah knows best, is to facilitate its recitation and memorization for all people, whether they are Arabs or non-Arabs (20).
It contains great principles: the first is the purification from nullification and polytheism as included in ﴾You alone we worship﴿. The second is the abandonment of thoughts of self-sufficiency by disavowing strength and power in the face of His greatness, as included in ﴾And You alone we ask for help﴿. The third is the desire to adorn oneself with guidance and righteousness as included in ﴾Guide us to the straight path﴿. The fourth is the desire to embody good examples as included in ﴾The path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor﴿. The fifth is the concern for safety from clear misguidance as included in ﴾Not of those who have evoked [Your] anger﴿. The sixth is the concern for the safety of their thinking from mingling with the doubts of falsehood disguised as truth, which is called misguidance, because misguidance is a mistake of the intended path, as included in ﴾Nor of those who are astray﴿.
The style of Al-Fatiha establishes four rules for the introduction: the first rule is to be concise in the introduction so that the souls of the listeners do not become weary from the long wait for the intended purpose, which is evident in Al-Fatiha, and to set a precedent for speakers so that they do not prolong the introduction lest they be attributed to stammering; for the longer the introduction, the shorter the purpose becomes. This shows the reason for placing it before the long surahs, even though it is a short surah. The second is to indicate the intended purpose, which is called the eloquence of the beginning, as this prepares the listeners to hear the details that will be presented to them, making them ready to receive it if they are among those who are receptive, or to critique and complete it if they are at that level. This indicates the speaker's mastery of the purpose and confidence in the correctness of their opinion on it, thereby alerting the listeners to their awareness, and it is a precedent for speakers to be aware of the purposes of their speech.
__________
(20) Fadil Al-Samarrai
